T2SP (Temporal To Spatial Programming, previously called T2S) enables software programmers to build a high-performance design for a tensor compute on a spatial architecture (like FPGAs) in a constructive, incremental, and productive way. Particularly, programmers can quickly build sophisticated systolic arrays on spatial architectures, where systolic arrays are often the key to achieve high performance. This methodology extends [Halide](https://halide-lang.org/) from temporal architectures (CPUs and GPUs) to spatial architectures.

T2SP is available under a permissive license, the [BSD+Patent license](./LICENSE.md). 

In this initial release, we support only Intel FPGAs. We assume your FPGA is local to you, or within Intel FPGA DevCloud, and the operating system is Linux. Other platforms might also work, but are not tested. 

# [DevCloud] Open an account

 + Register at [DevCloud](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/tools/devcloud/fpga.html). 
 + Follow the instructions of an approval email to set up your connection to DevCloud.
 + Add the following to your .bashrc:

```
    if [ -f /data/intel_fpga/devcloudLoginToolSetup.sh ]; then
        source /data/intel_fpga/devcloudLoginToolSetup.sh
    fi
```

# Open an interactive terminal

Local: open a bash shell

DevCloud: 

+ log into a compute node:

```
    devcloud_login
```

+ Choose 

```
    6) Enter Specific Node Number
       Choose a node with Arria 10 Release 1.2.1, or with Stratix 10.
```

# Clone T2SP

```
    git clone https://github.com/IntelLabs/t2sp
```

# Install tools

Local FPGA: Install the Intel FPGA SDK for OpenCL, 19.1 or above

+ Download [Intel FPGA SDK for OpenCL](http://dl.altera.com/opencl/)

+ Install

```
    tar -xvf AOCL-pro-*-linux.tar 
    ./setup_pro.sh
```

All platforms: we assume you have python >= 2.7 already installed. Install llvm-clang >= 9.0, gcc >= 7.5.0, and python's numpy and matplotlib package, if not yet:

```
    cd $HOME/t2sp
    ./install-tools.sh gcc             # if not installed yet
    ./install-tools.sh llvm-clang      # if not installed yet
    ./install-tools.sh python-packages # if not installed yet
````

During installation of gcc and llvm-clang, other dependencies might be needed. Here are some dependencies we know, and you can install them if needed:

```
    ./install-tools.sh m4|gmp|mpfr|mpc|cmake
````

Or you can install all the above tools without giving any option:

```
    ./install-tools.sh
```
This may take ~1 hour on a DevCloud machine.

# Install tools for GPU
Intel C for Metal Development Package is used to deploy our CM kernel on GPU.  If you need more details, please visit [c-for-metal-development-package](https://01.org/c-for-metal-development-package/downloads/linuxcformetaldevelopmentpackage20200119). Here we just give an example about how to launch our CM kernel generated by last step.

1. Download Linux C for metal Development Package and unzip it

```bash
wget https://github.com/intel/cm-compiler/releases/download/Master/Linux_C_for_Metal_Development_Package_20200119.zip
unzip Linux_C_for_Metal_Development_Package_20200119.zip
```

2. Chmod the cmc complier as executable

```bash
cd ~/Linux_C_for_Metal_Development_Package_20200119
chomd +x compiler/bin/cmc
```

3. Install Intel Media Driver for VAAPI and Intel Graphics Compiler. If you have root authority, you can just run drivers/install.sh and go step 4. 

   Here since we don't have root authority at Devcloud, we have to install the two packages manually. Thus please first unzip Intel Media Driver for VAAPI and Intel Graphics Compiler. 

```bash
cd ~/Linux_C_for_Metal_Development_Package_20200119/drivers/media_driver/release
mkdir extract
dpkg -X intel-media-u18.04-release.deb extract/

cd ~/Linux_C_for_Metal_Development_Package_20200119/drivers/IGC
mkdir extract
dpkg -X intel-igc.deb extract/
```

Then modify examples/Makefile.linux.

```bash
cd ~/Linux_C_for_Metal_Development_Package_20200119/examples
vim Makefile.linux
```

Modify the following two variables:

```bash
INCL          := -I$(CM_ROOT)/runtime/include -I.. -I$(CM_ROOT)/drivers/media_driver/release/extract/usr/include

HW_LDFLAGS      := -L$(CM_ROOT)/drivers/media_driver/release/extract/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu -L/$(CM_ROOT)/drivers/IGC/extract/usr/local/lib -L$(CM_ROOT)/drivers/media_driver/release/extract/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/dri -lva -ldl -fPIC
```

# Set up environment

```
    cd $HOME/t2sp
    cp setenv.sh my-setenv.sh
```

If you have your own gcc, llvm or clang and thus did not use `install-tools.sh` as shown above, in `my-setenv.sh`, modify the following path variables appropriately:

```
    GCC_PATH=...
    export LLVM_CONFIG=...
    export CLANG=...
```
If you installed the Intel C for Metal development package, modify the path variable:
```
    CM_ROOT=...
```

If you installed the Intel FPGA SDK for OpenCL for your local FPGA, check the following variables, and modify if needed:

```
    ALTERA_PATH=...
    AOCL_VERSION=...
    FPGA_BOARD_PACKAGE=...
    export FPGA_BOARD=...
    export LM_LICENSE_FILE=...
```

Note: here is an example to find out the board package and board (Assume Intel FPGA SDK for OpenCL 19.1 was installed under directory $HOME/intelFPGA_pro):

```
    $HOME/intelFPGA_pro/19.1/hld/bin/aoc -list-boards
    Board list:
      a10gx
         Board Package: $HOME/intelFPGA_pro/19.1/hld/board/a10_ref
    
      a10gx_hostpipe
         Board Package: $HOME/intelFPGA_pro/19.1/hld/board/a10_ref
```
There are 1 board package and 2 boards in this case, and you should set `FPGA_BOARD_PACKAGE=a10_ref`, and either `export FPGA_BOARD=a10gx` or `export FPGA_BOARD=a10gx_hostpipe`.

Set up the environment (whenever a new terminal is open) with one of the following commands:

```
    source ./my-setenv.sh local        # If using a local FPGA
    source ./my-setenv.sh devcloud     # If using DevCloud
```

# Build T2SP (whenever you change the source code)

```
    cd Halide
    make -j
    cd -
```

+ For debugging the T2SP compiler with source code information, ```make -j OPTIMIZE="-O0 -g"``` instead.
+ To debug runtime, ```make -j OPTIMIZE_RUNTIME="-O0 -g" ``` instead.
+ To enable both of them, ```make -j OPTIMIZE="-O0 -g" OPTIMIZE_RUNTIME="-O0 -g" ``` instead.

# Regression tests

```
     cd t2s/tests/correctness
    ./test.sh
```
Each sub-directory there contains a success.txt and failure.txt, which have the command lines for compiling and running every test. These tests are small examples one can play with.

To remove all the temporary files generated during the regression testing:

```
    ./test.sh clean
```

# Performance tests

Current release contains only SGEMM on Arria 10 FPGA. Follow the details at `t2s/tests/performance/gemm/README.md`.

# Features

The current release contains the following features:

+ Expressing systolic arrays
  
  UREs (uniform recurrence equations) and space-time transforms are supported for expressing systolic arrays in general. Currently, a space-time transform must be unimodular. 
  
+ Defining an abstract, performance portable memory hierarchy 

  A memory hierarchy is defined for each tensor by streaming the tensor across DRAM, SRAM, and registers. The memory hierarchy is then specialized by the compiler for specific hardware with portable performance. The current release targets FPGAs only. Next releases will support GPUs as well.

+ Isolation

  Split a compute into spatial pieces, so that each piece can be optimized individually.

+ Data optimizations

  Data gathering, scattering, double buffering, serialization

+ Loop optimizations

  Loop flattening, removal, unrolling, vectorization

# Tutorials

A 10-minute video `intro.mp4`, located at the root of the repository, introduces the basic concept of T2SP.

We have a set of [tutorials](https://github.com/intel/FPGA-Devcloud/tree/master/main/QuickStartGuides/T2S) at Intel FPGA DevCloud. A compiler binary is also there, and all dependencies have been installed, so you may start using the programming environment immediately.

# Next releases

+ SGEMM performance test that works across Arria 10 FPGA, GEN 9.5 GPU, and GEN 12 GPU with high and portable performance. Aim to open by the end of October, 2021.

  This will be our first test that builds a hardware systolic array on an FPGA and a software systolic array on a GPU with high performance in a single specification. 

+ Other portable performance tests, including 2-D convolution, Capsule convolution, and PairHMM, are aimed to open in November, 2021.

+ Support for Stratix 10 FPGA will be released afterwards (The current release works for S10 as well, but lacks some critical optimizations for it).

# Citation

If you use T2SP, please cite the following position paper:

```
    @article{T2SP,
      author    = {Hongbo Rong},
      title     = {Programmatic Control of a Compiler for Generating High-performance Spatial Hardware},
      journal   = {CoRR},
      volume    = {abs/1711.07606},
      year      = {2017},
      url       = {http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.07606},
      archivePrefix = {arXiv},
      eprint    = {1711.07606},
      timestamp = {Mon, 13 Aug 2018 16:46:47 +0200},
      biburl    = {https://dblp.org/rec/journals/corr/abs-1711-07606.bib},
      bibsource = {dblp computer science bibliography, https://dblp.org},
      note      = {Open source available at https://github.com/IntelLabs/t2sp}
    }
```

# Publications

+ **SuSy: a programming model for productive construction of high-performance systolic arrays on FPGAs**. 
Yi-Hsiang Lai, Hongbo Rong, Size Zheng, Weihao Zhang, Xiuping Cui, Yunshan Jia, Jie Wang, Brendan Sullivan, Zhiru Zhang, Yun Liang, Youhui Zhang, Jason Cong, Nithin George, Jose Alvarez, Christopher Hughes, and Pradeep Dubey. 2020.  ICCAD'20. [Link](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9256583) 

+ **T2S-Tensor: Productively Generating High-Performance Spatial Hardware for Dense Tensor Computations**. 
Nitish Srivastava, Hongbo Rong, Prithayan Barua, Guanyu Feng, Huanqi Cao, Zhiru Zhang, David Albonesi,Vivek Sarkar, Wenguang Chen, Paul Petersen, Geoff Lowney, Adam Herr, Christopher Hughes,Timothy Mattson, Pradeep Dubey. FCCM, 2019. [Link](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8735529)

# [Acknowledgement](./ACKNOWLEDGEMENT.md)
